.TH util 1 "March 2026" "shell-utils" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
util \- A shell-agnostic utility tool for managing user scripts
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B util
[arguments]
[\-\-help]
[\-\-to-stdout]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B util
is a shell-agnostic utility tool designed to make your scripts accessible everywhere using the `util` command. It was created to need no external runtime dependencies for its basic functionalities, including executing the scripts and providing assist for generating shell suggestions.

All the arguments represent the path to script to be executed from `$HOME/.config/shell-utils/scripts` without directory separators, like a CLI application. Additional arguments after the path is matched are seamlessly passed to the specified script. Before execution, verifies the SHA-256 hash of the script against a signed manifest. For user-added scripts, this manifest must be signed using a local keypair.

Custom completions can be set at a file named "[script_name].completions.[shell]". See `totp/_generate.completions.zsh` for reference. All the arguments passed to the script are also passed to the completion script.

Help sections can be added as a text after a comment line `# [help]`. See `update.sh` for reference. Multi-line texts are suported. All commented lines after the `help` header will be considered a part of the help section.

If an uncompleted but existing path to a command was given (a directory was found but not a script) the available scripts at the input path will be listed in a "commands available" section. A custom help section can be put inside a directory named `help` will be printed along the default "commands available" section. The help file content is printed using `printf` so it supports cutomization like text coloring.

The "commands available" section will list only the summarized help section of each script available (i.e. the first line of the `help` comment).

.SS Extra scripts

The objective of the `util` command is to provide a way to call your own custom scripts, but it also has a couple of useful ones.

They are called "extra scripts", useful for daily activies. Backup and update are good examples.

Unlike the defaults, some of the extra scripts have unspecified dependencies. This is intentional, as these scripts cover a large range of goals.

.SS Get started

The recommended way to install scripts is using the **packages** system. Create a configuration file at `$HOME/.config/shell-utils/config.json` listing the GitHub repositories you want to sync, and run:

.nf
.eo
util packages sync
.ec
.fi

Alternatively, you can manually add local scripts:

.nf
.eo
util config add <path/to/script>
.ec
.fi

.SH PACKAGES
The packages system allows you to manage collections of scripts from remote GitHub repositories. It supports parallel synchronization, version pinning, and automatic integrity signing.

Repositories are configured in a JSON file at
.B $HOME/.config/shell-utils/config.json
and the synchronized commit hashes are stored in
.B $HOME/.config/shell-utils/config.lock .

.TP
.B util packages sync
Synchronizes all repositories listed in the configuration file to
.B $HOME/.cache/shell-utils/packages
and copies the specified scripts to the user's scripts directory. By default, scripts are automatically signed using the system's **default GPG key**. You can override this by specifying a `user_id` in the configuration file.

.TP
.B Configuration Schema
.nf
{
  "signing": {
    "backend": "gpg",
    "user_id": "user@example.com"
  },
  "repositories": [
    {
      "url": "https://github.com/user/repo",
      "ref": "main",
      "scripts_path": "path/in/repo",
      "target_name": "local-folder-name",
      "on_update_scripts_path": "hooks/on-update",
      "on_update_target_name": "update-hooks"
    }
  ]
}
.fi

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-help
Show help information for the `util` script.

.TP
.B \-\-to-stdout
Print the script to the standard input.

.SH COMMANDS
.SS config add
.B util config add
<file|directory>
[\-t|\-\-target-name <name>]
[\-p|\-\-parent-path <path>]
[\-f|\-\-force]
[\-\-gpg-user <id>]

Makes a script or a folder of scripts accessible to the util command. Copies the source to the user-created scripts path in order for the scripts to be found by util. If is provided, the integrity manifest is automatically re-signed.

.TP
.B \-t, \-\-target-name <name>
Custom name for the target.

.TP
.B \-p, \-\-parent-path <path>
Subpath relative to scripts directory, right below the target path.

.TP
.B \-f, \-\-force
Force overwrite without confirmation prompt.

.TP
.B \-\-gpg-user <id>
GPG User ID used to decrypt the private key for signing the manifest.

.SS config remove
.B util config remove
<target>
[\-f|\-\-force]
[\-\-gpg-user <id>]

Deletes the script file or folder. If
.B \-\-gpg-user
is provided, the integrity manifest is automatically re-signed.

.TP
.B \-f, \-\-force
Force overwrite without confirmation prompt.

.TP
.B \-\-gpg-user <id>
GPG User ID used to decrypt the private key for signing the manifest.

.SS config trust
.B util config trust
[\-\-gpg\-user <id>]

Generates a local keypair (if it doesn't exist) and signs the integrity manifest for all user scripts. The private key is stored encrypted using GnuPG. By default, it uses the system's **default GPG key**.

.TP
.B \-\-gpg-user <id>
Optional GPG User ID for encrypting the private key and signing the manifest. If omitted, the default key is used.

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
.B util update
Executes a script named `update.sh` in `$HOME/.config/shell-utils/scripts`.

.TP
.B util git checkout-pr
Executes a script named `checkout-pr.sh` in `$HOME/.config/shell-utils/scripts/git`.

.TP
.B util config add ~/scripts
Copies the folder at ~/scripts to `$HOME/.config/shell-utils/scripts`. The scripts are now accessbile via `$ util <script-file-name>`. So if a `test.sh` is at ~/scripts, it is now accessbile via `$ util test`.

.TP
.B util config remove test/script
If `$HOME/.config/shell-utils/scripts/test/script.*` is a file, it is removed. If `$HOME/.config/shell-utils/scripts/test/script` is a directory, it is also removed entirely.

.SH AUTHOR
Written by vncsmyrnk.
.SH SEE ALSO
Visit https://github.com/vncsmyrnk/shell-utils for more information.
